# <font color=#FF0000>Block acknowledgment (block ack)</font>
The block ack mechanism improves channel efficiency by aggregating several acknowledgments into one
frame. **There are two types of block ack mechanisms: immediate and delayed.** Immediate block ack is suitable
for high-bandwidth, low-latency traffic while the delayed block ack is suitable for applications that tolerate
moderate latency. In this subclause, **the STA with data to send using the block ack mechanism is referred to as
the originator, and the receiver of that data as the recipient.** 

<font color="#FF8C00">**QoS Data frame is MPDU, A-MPDU is multiple data frames.**</font>  

## <font color=#FF0000>Frame Format</font>

01 Control 1000 Block Ack Request (BlockAckReq)  
01 Control 1001 Block Ack (BlockAck)  
00 Management 1101 Action  
Category code 3, Block Ack Action code 0, ADDBA Request frame  
Category code 3, Block Ack Action code 1, ADDBA Response frame format  
Category code 3, Block Ack Action code 2, DELBA frame format  


## <font color=#FF0000>Original text of the 802.11 standard</font>

#### <font color=#FF0000>Setup block ack agreement</font>
**The originator sends an ADDBA Request frame indicating the TID for which the block ack agreement is being set up.** 
When a block ack agreement is set up between HT STAs, the Buffer Size and Block Ack Timeout fields in the ADDBA Request frame are advisory. 

<font color="#FF8C00">**Set up a block ack agreement for each TID(traffic identifier).**</font>  

#### <font color=#FF0000>delayed block ack policy</font>
If the delayed block ack policy is used, the recipient shall respond to a Basic BlockAckReq frame with an Ack
frame. The recipient shall then send its Basic BlockAck frame response in a subsequently obtained TXOP.Once the contents of the Basic BlockAck frame have been prepared, the recipient shall send this frame in the
earliest possible TXOP using the highest priority AC. The originator shall respond with an Ack frame upon
receipt of the Basic BlockAck frame. 


#### <font color=#FF0000>immediate block ack policy</font>

If the immediate block ack policy is used, the recipient shall respond to a Basic BlockAckReq frame with a
Basic BlockAck frame. If the recipient sends the Basic BlockAck frame, the originator updates its own record
and retries any frames that are not acknowledged in the Basic BlockAck frame, either in another block or
individually. 

#### <font color=#FF0000>Block Ack Bitmap subfield</font>
The Basic BlockAck frame contains acknowledgments for the MPDUs of up to 64 previous MSDUs. In the
Basic BlockAck frame, **the STA acknowledges only the MPDUs starting from the starting sequence control
value until the MPDU with the highest sequence number that has been received**, and the STA shall set bits in
the Block Ack Bitmap subfield corresponding to all other MPDUs to 0. The status of MPDUs that are
considered “old” and prior to the sequence number range for which the receiver maintains status shall be
reported as successfully received (i.e., the corresponding bit in the bitmap shall be set to 1). If the Basic
BlockAck frame indicates that an MPDU was not received correctly, the originator shall retry that MPDU
subject to that MPDU’s appropriate lifetime limit. 

#### <font color=#FF0000>Recipient Receive buffer operation</font>
For each block ack agreement, the recipient maintains a MAC variable NextExpectedSequenceNumber. The
NextExpectedSequenceNumber is initialized to the value of the Block Ack Starting Sequence Control field of
the ADDBA Request frame of the accepted block ack agreement.

Upon the receipt of a QoS Data frame from the originator for which a block ack agreement exists, the recipient
buffers the MSDU regardless of the value of the Ack Policy subfield within the QoS Control field of the QoS Data frame, unless the sequence number of the frame is older than the NextExpectedSequenceNumber for that block ack agreement, in which case the frame is discarded because it is either old or a duplicate. 

**If a BlockAckReq frame is received, all complete MSDUs and A-MSDUs with lower sequence numbers than
the starting sequence number contained in the BlockAckReq frame shall be passed up to the next MAC process
as shown in Figure 5-1.** Upon arrival of a BlockAckReq frame, the recipient shall pass up the MSDUs and
A-MSDUs starting with the starting sequence number sequentially until there is an incomplete or missing
MSDU or A-MSDU in the buffer. If no MSDUs or A-MSDUs are passed up to the next MAC process after the
receipt of the BlockAckReq frame and the starting sequence number of the BlockAckReq frame is newer than
the NextExpectedSequenceNumber for that block ack agreement, then the NextExpectedSequenceNumber for
that block ack agreement is set to the sequence number of the BlockAckReq frame.

If, after an MPDU is received, the receive buffer is full, the complete MSDU or A-MSDU with the earliest
sequence number shall be passed up to the next MAC process.

If, after an MPDU is received, the receive buffer is not full, but the sequence number of the complete MSDU or
A-MSDU in the buffer with the lowest sequence number is equal to the NextExpectedSequenceNumber for
that block ack agreement, then the MPDU shall be passed up to the next MAC process.

Each time that the recipient passes an MSDU or A-MSDU for a block ack agreement up to the next MAC
process, the NextExpectedSequenceNumber for that block ack agreement is set to the sequence number of the
MSDU or A-MSDU that was passed up to the next MAC process plus one.

The recipient shall pass MSDUs and A-MSDUs up to the next MAC process in order of increasing sequence
number.

#### <font color=#FF0000>Teardown of the block ack mechanism</font>

When the originator has no data to send and the final block ack exchange has completed, it shall signal the end
of its use of the block ack mechanism by **sending the DELBA frame to its recipient**. The recipient does not
generate a Management frame in response to the DELBA frame.41 The recipient of the DELBA frame shall
release all resources allocated for the block ack transfer.

**The block ack agreement may be torn down if there are no BlockAck, BlockAckReq, or QoS Data frames (sent
under block ack policy) for the block ack’s TID received from the peer within a duration of block ack timeout
value (see 11.5.4).**

#### <font color=#FF0000>HT-immediate block ack extensions</font>
The HT-immediate extensions simplify immediate block ack use with A-MPDUs and reduce recipient resource
requirements

The originator contains a transmit buffer control that uses WinStartO and WinSizeO to submit MPDUs for
transmission and releases transmit buffers upon receiving BlockAck frames from the recipient.
WinStartO is the starting sequence number of the transmit window, and WinSizeO is the number of buffers
negotiated in the block ack agreement.

The Aggregation control creates A-MPDUs. It may adjust the Ack Policy field of transmitted QoS Data frames
according to the rules defined in 10.24.7.7 in order to solicit BlockAck frame responses.

Each HT-immediate block ack agreement is uniquely identified by a tuple of Address 1, Address 2, and TID
from the ADDBA Response frame that successfully established the HT-immediate block ack agreement. The
STA that corresponds to Address 1 of the ADDBA Response frame is the originator. The STA that corresponds
to Address 2 of the ADDBA Response frame is the recipient.

**For each HT-immediate block ack agreement, the recipient chooses either full-state or partial-state operation**
(this choice is known only to the recipient). A STA may simultaneously use full-state operation for some
agreements and partial-state operation for other agreements. **The scoreboard context control stores an
acknowledgment bitmap containing the current reception status of MSDUs or A-MSDUs for HT-immediate
block ack agreements.** Under full-state operation, status is maintained in statically assigned memory. Under
partial-state operation, status is maintained in a cache memory; therefore, the status information is subject to
cache replacement. This entity provides the bitmap and the value for the Starting Sequence Number subfield to
be sent in BlockAck frame responses to the originator. 

Scoreboard context control refer to:
10.24.7.3 Scoreboard context control during full-state operation
10.24.7.4 Scoreboard context control during partial-state operation

#### <font color=#FF0000>A-MPDU in Block ACK mechanism</font>
A STA may send a block of data in a single A-MPDU where each Data frame has its Ack Policy field set to Normal Ack. 
The originator expects to receive a BlockAck frame response immediately following the A-MPDU if at least one Data frame is received without error.

#### <font color=#FF0000>GCR block ack retransmission policy</font>
Figure 10-36 shows an example of a frame exchange when the GCR block ack retransmission policy is used.
The AP sends several A-MSDUs using the GCR block ack retransmission policy. The AP then sends a
BlockAckReq frame to group member 1 of the GCR group, waits for the BlockAck frame, and then sends a
BlockAckReq frame to group member 2. After receiving the BlockAck frame from GCR group member 2,
the AP determines whether any A-MSDUs need to be retransmitted and sends additional A-MSDUs (some
of which might be retransmissions of previous A-MSDUs) using the GCR block ack retransmission policy.

#### Figure
<font color="#FF8C00">

Figure 5-1—MAC data plane architecture  
Figure 10-32—Message sequence chart for block ack mechanism: (a) setup, (b) data and acknowledgment transfer, and (c) teardown  
Figure 10-33—Typical block ack sequence when immediate policy is used  
Figure 10-34—Typical block ack sequence when delayed policy is used  
Figure 10-36—Example of frame exchange with GCR block ack retransmission policy  

</font>  